rst/main/loader.rst, before:

==================
Subtomogram Loader
==================

A :class:`SubtomogramLoader` is a pair of a 3D tomogram image and a
:class:`Molecules` object, with some additional parameters.

.. code-block:: python

    def __init__(self, image, molecules, order=3, scale=1.0, output_shape=Unset(), corner_safe=False): ...

1. ``image`` (`numpy.ndarray` or `dask.Array`) ... the tomogram image.
2. ``molecules`` (`Molecules`) ... molecules in the tomogram.
3. ``order`` (`int`) ... order of the spline interpolation. 0=nearest, 1=linear,
    3=cubic.
4. ``scale`` (`float`) ... scale (physical/pixel) of the tomogram image. This
    parameter must match the positions of ``molecules``.
5. ``output_shape`` (`tuple`) ... shape of the output subtomograms, which will be
    used to determine the subtomogram shape during subtomogram averaging.
6. ``corner_safe`` (`bool`) ... if true, the subtomogram loader will ensure that
    the volume inside the given output shape will not be affected after rotation,
    otherwise the corners of the subtomograms will be dimmer.

Subtomogram averaging
=====================

:meth:`average` crops all the subtomograms around the molecules and
average them. This method always returns a 3D :class:`numpy.ndarray` object.

.. code-block:: python

    from dask import array as da
    from acryo import SubtomogramLoader, Molecules

    image = da.random.random((100, 100, 100))
    molecules = Molecules([[40, 40, 60], [60, 60, 40]])

    # give output shape beforehand
    loader = SubtomogramLoader(image, molecules, output_shape=(64, 64, 64))
    avg = loader.average()

    # or give output shape after construction
    loader = SubtomogramLoader(image, molecules)
    avg = loader.average(output_shape=(64, 64, 64))

Subtomogram Alignment
=====================

Templated alignment
-------------------

:meth:`align` crops all the subtomograms around the molecules and
align them to the given template image (reference image). This method will return
a new :class:`SubtomogramLoader` object with the updated :class:`Molecules` object.

You have to provide a template image, optionally a mask image, maximum shifts and
an alignment model. The default alignment model is :class:`ZNCCAlignment`.

.. code-block:: python

    from dask import array as da
    from acryo import SubtomogramLoader, Molecules

    image = da.random.random((100, 100, 100))
    template = np.random.random((20, 20, 20))
    molecules = Molecules([[40, 40, 60], [60, 60, 40]])

    loader = SubtomogramLoader(image, molecules)
    out = loader.align(template, max_shifts=(5, 5, 5))

If you want to give parameters to the alignment model, you can use the :meth:`with_params`
method of alignment model classes. It returns a factory function for the parametrized model.

.. code-block:: python

    loader = SubtomogramLoader(image, molecules)
    out = loader.align(
        template,
         max_shifts=(5, 5, 5),
         alignment_model=ZNCCAlignment.with_params(cutoff=0.5),
        )

Template-free alignment
-----------------------

If no a priori information is available for the template image, you'll use the subtomogram
averaging result as the template image. During this task, each subtomogram will be loaded
twice so it is not efficient to call :meth:`average` and :meth:`align` separately.

:meth:`align_no_template` creates a local cache of subtomograms so that alignment will be
faster.

.. code-block:: python

    loader = SubtomogramLoader(image, molecules)
    out = loader.align_no_template(max_shifts=(5, 5, 5), output_shape=(20, 20, 20))

Commit message:

fix multi-template alignment, add test

rst/main/loader.rst, after:

==================
Subtomogram Loader
==================

A :class:`SubtomogramLoader` is a pair of a 3D tomogram image and a
:class:`Molecules` object, with some additional parameters.

.. code-block:: python

    def __init__(self, image, molecules, order=3, scale=1.0, output_shape=Unset(), corner_safe=False): ...

1. ``image`` (`numpy.ndarray` or `dask.Array`) ... the tomogram image.
2. ``molecules`` (`Molecules`) ... molecules in the tomogram.
3. ``order`` (`int`) ... order of the spline interpolation. 0=nearest, 1=linear,
    3=cubic.
4. ``scale`` (`float`) ... scale (physical/pixel) of the tomogram image. This
    parameter must match the positions of ``molecules``.
5. ``output_shape`` (`tuple`) ... shape of the output subtomograms, which will be
    used to determine the subtomogram shape during subtomogram averaging.
6. ``corner_safe`` (`bool`) ... if true, the subtomogram loader will ensure that
    the volume inside the given output shape will not be affected after rotation,
    otherwise the corners of the subtomograms will be dimmer.

Subtomogram averaging
=====================

:meth:`average` crops all the subtomograms around the molecules and
average them. This method always returns a 3D :class:`numpy.ndarray` object.

.. code-block:: python

    from dask import array as da
    from acryo import SubtomogramLoader, Molecules

    image = da.random.random((100, 100, 100))
    molecules = Molecules([[40, 40, 60], [60, 60, 40]])

    # give output shape beforehand
    loader = SubtomogramLoader(image, molecules, output_shape=(64, 64, 64))
    avg = loader.average()

    # or give output shape after construction
    loader = SubtomogramLoader(image, molecules)
    avg = loader.average(output_shape=(64, 64, 64))

Subtomogram Alignment
=====================

Templated alignment
-------------------

:meth:`align` crops all the subtomograms around the molecules and
align them to the given template image (reference image). This method will return
a new :class:`SubtomogramLoader` object with the updated :class:`Molecules` object.

You have to provide a template image, optionally a mask image, maximum shifts and
an alignment model. The default alignment model is :class:`ZNCCAlignment`.

.. code-block:: python

    from dask import array as da
    from acryo import SubtomogramLoader, Molecules

    image = da.random.random((100, 100, 100))
    template = np.random.random((20, 20, 20))
    molecules = Molecules([[40, 40, 60], [60, 60, 40]])

    loader = SubtomogramLoader(image, molecules)
    out = loader.align(template, max_shifts=(5, 5, 5))

If you want to give parameters to the alignment model, you can use the :meth:`with_params`
method of alignment model classes. It returns a factory function for the parametrized model.

.. code-block:: python

    loader = SubtomogramLoader(image, molecules)
    out = loader.align(
        template,
        max_shifts=(5, 5, 5),
        alignment_model=ZNCCAlignment.with_params(cutoff=0.5),
    )

Template-free alignment
-----------------------

If no a priori information is available for the template image, you'll use the subtomogram
averaging result as the template image. During this task, each subtomogram will be loaded
twice so it is not efficient to call :meth:`average` and :meth:`align` separately.

:meth:`align_no_template` creates a local cache of subtomograms so that alignment will be
faster.

.. code-block:: python

    loader = SubtomogramLoader(image, molecules)
    out = loader.align_no_template(max_shifts=(5, 5, 5), output_shape=(20, 20, 20))

Multi-template alignment
------------------------

If a tomogram is composed of heterogeneous molecules, you can use multiple templates to
align the molecules and determine the best template for each molecule.

.. code-block:: python

    loader = SubtomogramLoader(image, molecules)
    out = loader.align_multi_templates(
        [template0, template1, template2],
        max_shifts=(5, 5, 5),
        alignment_model=ZNCCAlignment.with_params(cutoff=0.5),
        label_name="template_id",
    )
    out.molecules.features["template_id"]  # get the best template id for each molecule

Here, input templates must be given as a list of :class:`numpy.ndarray` objects of the
same shape. ``label_name`` is the name used for the feature colummn of the best template.
